<!-- source URL cache · perf-kp-sql LLM-as-Judge (a3) input -->
<!-- url: https://finisky.github.io/en/mongodb-chunk-migration-failed/ -->
<!-- url_final: https://finisky.github.io/en/mongodb-chunk-migration-failed/ -->
<!-- fetched_at: 2026-05-03T08:51:24.741Z -->
<!-- html_bytes: 39629 · text_chars: 5608 -->
<!-- used_by_cases: 1 -->
MongoDB Chunk Migration Failed Solution: Unable to acquire X lock - Finisky Garden 

Finisky Garden
NLP, Software Engineering, Product Design

Home 
NLP/AI 
MongoDB 
Tags 
Categories 
Archives 
Links 
About 

TOC
Overview
Increase maxTransactionLockRequestTimeoutMillis ? 
Jumbo Chunks? 
Restart the Source Mongod 

Scan to follow WeChat

Scan to follow WeChat

118 
Posts 
12 
Categories 
50 
Tags 

Related Posts

Don't Use Load Balancer In front of Mongos 

Deploy MongoDB Sharded Cluster by Ops Manager 

How to Get the MongoDB Chunk Size 

How to Use Multiple Backup Daemons in MongoDB Kubernetes Operator 

Migrate Ops Manager to a new Kubernetes Cluster 

0% 

MongoDB Chunk Migration Failed Solution: Unable to acquire X lock

Publish on:
2021-10-01

Classify at:
MongoDB 

Read:&ap; 
4min 

Views:

Comments:

After adding new shards to our production MongoDB cluster (v4.4.6-ent with 5 shards, 3 replicas for each shard), we found that the balancer is not working. sh.status() displays many chunk migration errors:
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
...
balancer:
Currently enabled: yes
Currently running: no
Failed balancer rounds in last 5 attempts: 0
Migration Results for the last 24 hours:
7 : Failed with error 'aborted', from mongo-1 to mongo-3
7208 : Failed with error 'aborted', from mongo-1 to mongo-4
databases:
{ "_id" : "X", "primary" : "mongo-1", "partitioned" : true, "version" : { "uuid" : UUID("xxx"), "lastMod" : 1 } }
X.A
shard key: { "Uuid" : 1 }
unique: false
balancing: true
chunks:
mongo-0 231
mongo-1 327
mongo-2 230
mongo-3 208
... 

Obviously, the chunks is unbalanced accross shards (327 vs 208). Since the balancer is enabled, we try to debug the issue through mongodb.log on the config server. There are many migration failed logs (sensitive infomation masked):
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
{ 
"t" : { 
"$date" : "2021-09-27T05:05:46.090+00:00" 
}, 
"s" : "I" , 
"c" : "SHARDING" , 
"id" : 21872 , 
"ctx" : "Balancer" , 
"msg" : "Migration failed" , 
"attr" : { 
"migrateInfo" : "X.A: [{ Uuid: MinKey }, { Uuid: \"xxx\" }), from mongo-a-1, to mongo-a-4" , 
"error" : "LockTimeout: Unable to acquire X lock on '{13328793763114131834: Collection, 1799578717045662184, X.A}' within 500ms. opId: 669456657, op: MoveChunk, connId: 0." 
} 
} 

Because the above error happens for the first chunk to be migrated, the whole balancing process is blocked by this error which makes shard mongo-1 holds much more data than other shards. It seems that the error is caused by Unable to acquire X lock on collection .
Try to manually movechunk according to
this

, but got the same error:
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
MongoDB Enterprise mongos> sh.moveChunk ( "X.A" , { "Uuid" : "XX" } , "mongo-3" ) 
{ 
"ok" : 0,
"errmsg" : "Unable to acquire X lock on '{13328793763114131834: Collection, 1799578717045662184, X.A}' within 500ms. opId: 719103624, op: MoveChunk, connId: 0." ,
"code" : 24,
"codeName" : "LockTimeout" ,
"operationTime" : Timestamp ( 1632890816, 39 ) ,
" $clusterTime " : { 
"clusterTime" : Timestamp ( 1632890816, 39 ) ,
"signature" : { 
"hash" : BinData ( 0, "/=" ) ,
"keyId" : NumberLong ( "6952576454697680898" ) 
} 
} 
} 

Increase maxTransactionLockRequestTimeoutMillis ?

Google a similar discussion
here

, which suggests to set maxTransactionLockRequestTimeoutMillis longer. However, I think 500ms is long enough to acquire the lock, change the parameter may have side effect on the production environment, so we don&rsquo;t test whether it works.
Jumbo Chunks?

According to
this post

, jumbo chunks might lead to migration failure. So we checked the collection chunks by sh.status(true) , NO jumbo chunks found.
Restart the Source Mongod

We also try to check the current operations and locks via db.currentOp() , but not have a clue.
Finally, we restart the source mongod process through MongoDB Ops Manager to change the primary in the shard. Surprisingly, it works! A few miniutes later, chunks are evenly distributed accross shards:
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
...
balancer:
Currently enabled: yes
Currently running: no
Balancer active window is set between 17:45 and 11:59 server local time
Failed balancer rounds in last 5 attempts: 0
Migration Results for the last 24 hours:
236 : Success
2 : Failed with error 'aborted', from mongo-4 to mongo-0
databases:
{ "_id" : "X", "primary" : "mongo-1", "partitioned" : true, "version" : { "uuid" : UUID("xxx"), "lastMod" : 1 } }
X.A
shard key: { "Uuid" : 1 }
unique: false
balancing: true
chunks:
mongo-0 207
mongo-1 207
mongo-2 207
mongo-3 207
mongo-4 208
... 

We guess that the root cause is that the original mongod process has inconsistent states. Restart is just a simple way to force another member to become primary, which bypass the inconsistent states issue of the original mongod.
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
{ 
"t" : { 
"$date" : "2021-09-29T02:43:35.602+00:00" 
}, 
"s" : "I" , 
"c" : "SHARDING" , 
"id" : 21872 , 
"ctx" : "Balancer" , 
"msg" : "Migration failed" , 
"attr" : { 
"migrateInfo" : "X.A: [{ Uuid: \"xxx\" }, { Uuid: \"xxx\" }), from mongo-a-1, to mongo-a-4" , 
"error" : "Overflow: Invalid advance (1) past end of buffer[0] at offset: 0" 
} 
} 

The error Overflow: Invalid advance past end of buffer at offset can be resolved by manually restart the source monogd as well.

MongoDB
Kubernetes
MongoDB Ops Manager
Sharding 

How to Get the MongoDB Chunk Size 
Prevent Pod From Endless Restart

Comments 

&copy;
2026
| 
Total Views: ...
