---
source_url: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/configuration-options/
source_tier: official
accessed: 2026-04-20
title: "Self-Managed Configuration File Options - Database Manual - MongoDB Docs"
---

# Self-Managed Configuration File Options - Database Manual - MongoDB Docs

Docs Home / Management / Configuration and MaintenanceDocs Home / Management / Configuration and MaintenanceDocs Home / Management / Configuration and MaintenanceSelf-Managed Configuration File OptionsCopy pageThe following page describes the configuration options available in MongoDB 8.0. For configuration file options for other versions of MongoDB, see the appropriate version of the MongoDB Manual.NoteIf you're using MongoDB Atlas to manage your MongoDB deployments in the cloud, you don't need to create a configuration file. To learn how to configure settings for your MongoDB Atlas deployment, see Configure Additional Settings.In addition to using the configuration file options, the default configuration for the MongoDB binaries also uses the operating system environment variables.Configuration FileYou can configure mongod and mongos instances at startup using a configuration file. The configuration file contains settings that are equivalent to the mongod and mongos command-line options. See Self-Managed Configuration File Settings and Command-Line Options Mapping.Using a configuration file makes managing mongod and mongos options easier, especially for large-scale deployments. You can also add comments to the configuration file to explain the server's settings.If you installed MongoDB with a package manager such as yum or apt on Linux or brew on macOS, or with the MSI installer on Windows, a default configuration file has been provided as part of your installation:PlatformMethodConfiguration FileLinuxapt, yum, or zypper Package Manager/etc/mongod.confmacOSbrew Package Manager/usr/local/etc/mongod.conf (on Intel processors), or/opt/homebrew/etc/mongod.conf (on Apple M1 processors)WindowsMSI Installer<install directory>\bin\mongod.cfgIf you installed MongoDB through a downloaded TGZ or ZIP file, you must create your own configuration file. The basic example configuration is a good place to start.File FormatMongoDB configuration files use the YAML format [1].The following sample configuration file contains several mongod settings that you may adapt to your local configuration:NoteYAML does not support tab characters for indentation: use spaces instead.systemLog: destination: file path: "/var/log/mongodb/mongod.log" logAppend: trueprocessManagement: fork: truenet: bindIp: 127.0.0.1 port: 27017setParameter: enableLocalhostAuthBypass: false...The Linux package init scripts included in the official MongoDB packages depend on specific values for systemLog.path, storage.dbPath, and processManagement.fork or MONGODB_CONFIG_OVERRIDE_NOFORK system environment variable. If you modify these settings in the default configuration file, mongod may not start.[1] YAML is a superset of JSON.Externally Sourced ValuesNoteMongoDB supports using expansion directives in configuration files to load externally sourced values. Expansion directives can load values for specific configuration file options or load the entire configuration file.The following expansion directives are available:Expansion DirectiveDescription__restAllows users to specify a REST endpoint as the external source for configuration file options or the full configuration file.If the configuration file includes the __rest expansion, on Linux/macOS, the read access to the configuration file must be limited to the user running the mongod / mongos process only.__execAllows users to specify a shell or terminal command as the external source for configuration file options or the full configuration file.If the configuration file includes the __exec expansion, on Linux/macOS, the write access to the configuration file must be limited to the user running the mongod / mongos process only.For complete documentation, see External Configuration Values for Self-Managed MongoDB.Use the Configuration FileTo configure mongod or mongos using a config file, specify the config file with the --config option or the -f option, as in the following examples:For example, the following uses mongod --config <configuration file> mongos --config <configuration file>:mongod --config /etc/mongod.confmongos --config /etc/mongos.confYou can also use the -f alias to specify the configuration file, as in the following:mongod -f /etc/mongod.confmongos -f /etc/mongos.confIf you installed from a package and have started MongoDB using your system's init script, you are already using a configuration file.Expansion Directives and --configExpandIf you are using expansion directives in the configuration file, you must include the --configExpand option when starting the mongod or mongos. For example:mongod --config /etc/mongod.conf --configExpand "rest,exec"mongos --config /etc/mongos.conf --configExpand "rest,exec"If the configuration file includes an expansion directive and you start the mongod / mongos without specifying that directive in the --configExpand option, the mongod / mongos fails to start.For complete documentation, see External Configuration Values for Self-Managed MongoDB.Core OptionssystemLog OptionssystemLog: verbosity: <int> quiet: <boolean> traceAllExceptions: <boolean> syslogFacility: <string> path: <string> logAppend: <boolean> logRotate: <string> destination: <string> timeStampFormat: <string> component: accessControl: verbosity: <int> command: verbosity: <int> # COMMENT additional component verbosity settings omitted for brevitysystemLog.verbosityType: integerDefault: 0The default log message verbosity level for components. The verbosity level determines the amount of Informational and Debug messages MongoDB outputs. [2]The verbosity level can range from 0 to 5:0 is the MongoDB's default log verbosity level, to include Informational messages.1 to 5 increases the verbosity level to include Debug messages.To use a different verbosity level for a named component, use the component's verbosity setting. For example, use the systemLog.component.accessControl.verbosity to set the verbosity level specifically for ACCESS components.See the systemLog.component.<name>.verbosity settings for specific component verbosity settings.For various ways to set the log verbosity level, see Configure Log Verbosity Levels.[2] Starting in version 4.2, MongoDB includes the Debug verbosity level (1-5) in the log messages. For example, if the verbosity level is 2, MongoDB logs D2. In previous versions, MongoDB log messages only specified D for Debug level.systemLog.quietType: booleanDefault: falseRun mongos or mongod in a quiet mode that attempts to limit the amount of output.systemLog.quiet is not recommended for production systems as it may make tracking problems during particular connections much more difficult.systemLog.traceAllExceptionsType: booleanDefault: falsePrint verbose information for debugging. Use for additional logging for support-related troubleshooting.systemLog.syslogFacilityType: stringDefault: userThe facility level used when logging messages to syslog. The value you specify must be supported by your operating system's implementation of syslog. To use this option, you must set systemLog.destination to syslog.systemLog.pathType: stringThe path of the log file to which mongod or mongos should send all diagnostic logging information, rather than the standard output or the host's syslog. MongoDB creates the log file at the specified path.The Linux package init scripts do not expect systemLog.path to change from the defaults. If you use the Linux packages and change systemLog.path, you must use your own init scripts and disable the built-in scripts.systemLog.logAppendType: booleanDefault: falseWhen true, mongos or mongod appends new entries to the end of the existing log file when the instance restarts. Without this option, mongod or mongos backs up the existing log and create a new file.systemLog.logRotateType: stringDefault: renameDetermines the behavior for the logRotate command when rotating the server log and/or the audit log. Specify either rename or reopen:rename renames the log file.reopen closes and reopens the log file following the typical Linux/Unix log rotate behavior. Use reopen when using the Linux/Unix logrotate utility to avoid log loss.If you specify reopen, you must also set systemLog.logAppend to true.systemLog.destinationType: stringThe destination to which MongoDB sends all log output. Specify either file or syslog. If you specify file, you must also specify systemLog.path.If you do not specify systemLog.destination, MongoDB sends all log output to standard output.WarningThe syslog daemon generates timestamps when it logs a message, not when MongoDB issues the message. This can lead to misleading timestamps for log entries, especially when the system is under heavy load. We recommend using the file option for production systems to ensure accurate timestamps.systemLog.timeStampFormatType: stringDefault: iso8601-localThe time format for timestamps in log messages. Specify one of the following values:ValueDescriptioniso8601-utcDisplays timestamps in Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) in the ISO-8601 format. For example, for New York at the start of the Epoch: 1970-01-01T00:00:00.000Ziso8601-localDisplays timestamps in local time in the ISO-8601 format. For example, for New York at the start of the Epoch: 1969-12-31T19:00:00.000-05:00NotesystemLog.timeStampFormat no longer supports ctime. An example of ctime formatted date is: Wed Dec 31 18:17:54.811.systemLog.component OptionssystemLog: component: accessControl: verbosity: <int> command: verbosity: <int> # COMMENT some component verbosity settings omitted for brevity replication: verbosity: <int> election: verbosity: <int> heartbeats: verbosity: <int> initialSync: verbosity: <int> rollback: verbosity: <int> storage: verbosity: <int> journal: verbosity: <int> recovery: verbosity: <int> write: verbosity: <int>NoteStarting in version 4.2, MongoDB includes the Debug verbosity level (1-5) in the log messages. For example, if the verbosity level is 2, MongoDB logs D2. In previous versions, MongoDB log messages only specified D for Debug level.systemLog.component.assert.verbosityType: integerDefault: 0The log message verbosity level for assertions encountered by user operations in MongoDB. Typically an assertion is triggered when an operation returns an error. See ASSERT components.systemLog.component.accessControl.verbosityType: integerDefault: 0The log message verbosity level for components related to access control. See ACCESS components.The verbosity level can range from 0 to 5:0 is the MongoDB's default log verbosity level, to include Informational messages.1 to 5 increases the verbosity level to include Debug messages.systemLog.component.command.verbosityType: integerDefault: 0The log message verbosity level for components related to commands. See COMMAND components.The verbosity level can range from 0 to 5:0 is the MongoDB's default log verbosity level, to include Informational messages.1 to 5 increases the verbosity level to include Debug messages.systemLog.component.control.verbosityType: integerDefault: 0The log message verbosity level for components related to control operations. See CONTROL components.The verbosity level can range from 0 to 5:0 is the MongoDB's default log verbosity level, to include Informational messages.1 to 5 increases the verbosity level to include Debug messages.systemLog.component.ftdc.verbosityType: integerDefault: 0The log message verbosity level for components related to diagnostic data collection operations. See FTDC components.The verbosity level can range from 0 to 5:0 is the MongoDB's default log verbosity level, to include Informational messages.1 to 5 increases the verbosity level to include Debug messages.systemLog.component.geo.verbosityType: integerDefault: 0The log message verbosity level for components related to geospatial parsing operations. See GEO components.The verbosity level can range from 0 to 5:0 is the MongoDB's default log verbosity level, to include Informational messages.1 to 5 increases the verbosity level to include Debug messages.s …[truncated for distillation]
